# CSS
CSS — це мова, яку ми використовуємо для оформлення HTML-документа.
CSS описує, як мають відображатися елементи HTML.<br />
# STRUCTURE CSS
**CSS Example**  <br />
```javascript
body {
  background-color: lightblue;
}

h1 {
  color: white;
  text-align: center;
}

p {
  font-family: verdana;
  font-size: 20px;
}
```
**The display Property**  <br />
The display property specifies if/how an element is displayed.
Every HTML element has a default display value depending on what type of element it is. The default display value for most elements is block or inline.<br />
Example:
```javascript
li {
  display: inline;
}
```
```javascript
li {
  display: block;
}
```
**Align Text**  <br />
To just center the text inside an element, use text-align: center(left,right);<br />
Example:
```javascript
.center {
  text-align: center;
}
```
**The position Property**  <br />
The position property specifies the type of positioning method used for an element.

There are five different position values:
-static
-relative
-fixed
-absolute
-sticky
Elements are then positioned using the top, bottom, left, and right properties. However, these properties will not work unless the position property is set first. They also work differently depending on the position value.<br />
Example:
```javascript
div.relative {
  position: relative;
}
```
**The z-index Property**  <br />
When elements are positioned, they can overlap other elements.
The z-index property specifies the stack order of an element (which element should be placed in front of, or behind, the others).<br />
Example:
```javascript
img {
  z-index: -1;
}
```
**CSS Margins**  <br />
CSS has properties for specifying the margin for each side of an element:
- margin-top
- margin-right
- margin-bottom
- margin-left<br />
Example:
```javascript
p {
  margin-top: 100px;
  margin-bottom: 100px;
  margin-right: 150px;
  margin-left: 80px;
}
```
**CSS Padding**  <br />
CSS has properties for specifying the padding for each side of an element:
- padding-top
- padding-right
- padding-bottom
- padding-left<br />
Example:
```javascript
div {
  padding-top: 50px;
  padding-right: 30px;
  padding-bottom: 50px;
  padding-left: 80px;
}
```
**CSS Border**  <br />
The border-style property specifies what kind of border to display.
The following values are allowed:
- dotted - Defines a dotted border
- dashed - Defines a dashed border
- solid - Defines a solid border
- double - Defines a double border
- groove - Defines a 3D grooved border. The effect depends on the border-color value
- ridge - Defines a 3D ridged border. The effect depends on the border-color value
- inset - Defines a 3D inset border. The effect depends on the border-color value
- outset - Defines a 3D outset border. The effect depends on the border-color value
- none - Defines no border
- hidden - Defines a hidden border<br />
Example:
```javascript
p.dotted {border-style: dotted;}
p.dashed {border-style: dashed;}
p.solid {border-style: solid;}
p.double {border-style: double;}
p.groove {border-style: groove;}
p.ridge {border-style: ridge;}
p.inset {border-style: inset;}
p.outset {border-style: outset;}
p.none {border-style: none;}
p.hidden {border-style: hidden;}
p.mix {border-style: dotted dashed solid double;}
```
**CSS Colors**  <br />
Center Align Text
To just center the text inside an element, use text-align: center(left,right);<br />
Example:
```javascript
h1 {
  color: red;
}
```
**CSS Fonts**  <br />
In CSS, we use the font-family property to specify the font of a text.<br />
Example:
```javascript
.p1 {
  font-family: "Times New Roman", Times, serif;
}

.p2 {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}
```
The font-size property sets the size of the text.<br />
Example:
```javascript
h1 {
  font-size: 40px;
}

h2 {
  font-size: 30px;
}
```
**CSS Backgrounds**  <br />
The CSS background properties are used to add background effects for elements.
In these chapters, you will learn about the following CSS background properties:
- background-color
- background-image
- background-repeat
- background-attachment
- background-position
- background (shorthand property)<br />
Example:
```javascript
body {
  background-color: lightblue;
}
```
```javascript
body {
  background-image: url("paper.gif");
}
```
# CSS FOR ID
Style the element with id="firstname":
```javascript
#firstname {
  background-color: yellow;
}
```
# CSS VARIABLES
The var() function is used to insert the value of a CSS variable.
CSS variables have access to the DOM, which means that you can create variables with local or global scope, change the variables with JavaScript, and change the variables based on media queries.
A good way to use CSS variables is when it comes to the colors of your design. Instead of copy and paste the same colors over and over again, you can place them in variables.To create a variable with global scope, declare it inside the :root selector. The :root selector matches the document's root element.
To create a variable with local scope, declare it inside the selector that is going to use it.
The following example is equal to the example above, but here we use the var() function.
First, we declare two global variables (--blue and --white). Then, we use the var() function to insert the value of the variables later in the style sheet:
```javascript
:root {
  --blue: #1e90ff;
  --white: #ffffff;
}

body { background-color: var(--blue); }

h2 { border-bottom: 2px solid var(--blue); }

.container {
  color: var(--blue);
  background-color: var(--white);
  padding: 15px;
}

button {
  background-color: var(--white);
  color: var(--blue);
  border: 1px solid var(--blue);
  padding: 5px;
}
```
# CSS FUNCTIONS
CSS functions are used as a value for various CSS properties.

Function                                    Description

attr()                        	Returns the value of an attribute of the selected element
calc()                          Allows you to perform calculations to determine CSS property values
conic-gradient()              	Creates a conic gradient
counter()                      	Returns the current value of the named counter
cubic-bezier()      	          Defines a Cubic Bezier curve
hsl()                          	Defines colors using the Hue-Saturation-Lightness model (HSL)
hsla()	                        Defines colors using the Hue-Saturation-Lightness-Alpha model (HSLA)
linear-gradient()	              Creates a linear gradient
max()                          	Uses the largest value, from a comma-separated list of values, as the property value
min()                          	Uses the smallest value, from a comma-separated list of values, as the property value
radial-gradient()	              Creates a radial gradient
repeating-conic-gradient()    	Repeats a conic gradient
repeating-linear-gradient()    	Repeats a linear gradient
repeating-radial-gradient()    	Repeats a radial gradient
rgb()                          	Defines colors using the Red-Green-Blue model (RGB)
rgba()                         	Defines colors using the Red-Green-Blue-Alpha model (RGBA)
var()	                          Inserts the value of a custom property
